here comes the prime minister along with
jonathan van tam the
deputy chief medical officer for england
and uh stephen powers from the nhs
england i'm joined by steve price of nhs
england and jonathan van tam deputy
chief medical officer
across the world the countries that are
waging the most successful fights
against
coronavirus are adopting regional and
local measures to protect
their populations and that's why last
week we launched the three
local covid alert levels for england
with interventions based on the
prevalence of the virus
in local areas since then we've been
undertaking discussions with local
leaders
in those parts of the country which are
currently bearing the brunt of the
second wave
of this epidemic and before i update you
on those discussions i will ask
uh jonathan van tam to brief us on the
latest data
nationally and in greater manchester
thank you
uh jonathan thank you prime minister
first slide please
so um i'm beginning today's data
briefing
with a slide which i showed on the 12th
of october
and i'm doing that on purpose first of
all to remind you that there are two
maps of england here the one on the left
in purple
shows the weekly case rates per 100 000
and the one on the right in brown shows
the rate of change
per 100 000 population all by local
authority area level
and the darker colors indicate higher
rates of disease
or higher rates of change and you'll see
that these
geographic maps are current
for the week 30th of september to the
6th of october
and if you quickly look at those
shadings we'll now turn to the second
slide
which is the 8th of october to the 14th
of october
and you can clearly see that that dark
purple
confluent problem area has
extended from coast to coast now
and extends quite a long way down the
country
in contrast the rate of change is more
variable
and there are more patches of green
indicating a negative rate of change
as much as there are new patches of dark
brown
such as in lincolnshire next slide
please
and there's a similar picture for those
age 60 and above again
these are the old geographic maps that i
showed you
eight days ago and changing to the new
graph now
you can see that the purple areas have
increased
and there are some new areas of
increased rate of change in the over 60s
and i really want to emphasize that it
is the over sixties
that really worries us most because
these are the people
who become severely ill with covid19
they are more likely to be admitted to
hospital if they are admitted to
hospital they stay in hospital
for longer and sadly they are more
difficult to save
next slide please so
here are the data broken down by age
band
and by english region beginning with the
north
east the north west yorkshire and humber
and really each of these subplots
is a contrasting game of two halves
in as much that the 10 to 19 and 20 to
age group you can see that the weekly
case rate
has declined on all of those traces
now this may be partly ascertainment it
may relate
to the rate at which people are coming
forwards for testing which is now flat
because the rate of swab positivity
continues to increase
but the other half of the coin if you
like
are the older age groups from 30 to 39
through to 80 plus and here you can see
over time
this continuing increase in case rates
and this really shows us now that the
infections which have seeded in the
younger age groups
are now penetrating those older age
groups as we go forwards in time
and these are cases this means that the
hospital admissions
and the deaths sadly that are linked to
those cases
are now baked in for the next two to
three weeks
next slide please these are the same
graphs again but this time for the east
midlands for london and the west
midlands
you can again gain sea particularly in
the east midlands and related to
nottingham particularly that drop in the
10 to 19 and 20 to 29
but the continuing increase in case
rates
in the other ages next slide please
and the same is true of east of england
south east
and south west but at much much
lower overall levels of disease than we
are currently seeing in the north of
england
next slide please now again i'm
referring back to the heat maps that i
showed you on the 12th of october
showing that gradual warming up of
disease rates in the 16 to 29
that then creeps through into the older
age groups
with a few weeks lag as we move through
the
age bands as we go up each of the blocks
that's the visual snapshot from the 12th
of october i'll now move
to the new snapshot
and i think it's pretty stark i think
you can see
very clearly now from these data that
are just
um a week on how those heat maps
have increased very markedly not just in
the northeast
not just in the north west but also in
the east midlands
top left and in yorkshire and humber
bottom right this is most concerning
because it's the penetration of disease
into the older age groups
that gives the nhs significant problems
next slide please and indeed
here are the weekly covid19 hospital
admission rates
in england by age group and you can see
very very marked and very steep
increases for 85 plus 75 to 84
and 65 to 74. and some of you
the eagle eyed amongst you will say well
these data
extend up until the 11th of october
i will show you some data that go
further than that
though they are not segregated by age
but the pattern is the same
next slide please before i do so
these are the icu and hdu admission
rates
you can see that same very sharp rise in
to 84s 65 to 74s and 55
45 to 64s but um
less so in aged 85 plus consistent with
the fact that fewer patients in that age
group are appropriate clinical
candidates for intensive care
next slide please and i did say i would
bring those data from the 11th of
october right up to date for you
so these are up to the 17th of october
and they show daily covid19 patients
admitted
by english region you can see that the
burden at the moment is in the north
west
northeast and yorkshire but with an
increasing burden
in the midlands and the little red
arrows
that are on each of the x-axis show you
where the level was
one week ago which shows you once this
gets started in an area
how quickly then builds next slide
please
these are total numbers
of patients in hospital with covid19 as
opposed to new admissions
but again you can see that that trend
of increasing burden in the nhs
continues
with some dramatic increases in the last
week
next slide please and
prime minister asked me to focus a
little on greater manchester
these are the heat maps for greater
manchester
up to date on the october the 15th and
the data
extending from early september through
to that date
and you can see across the
sub-regions of greater manchester there
are really
very significant um
areas of heat across pretty much all of
the ages
and really extending to some deep purple
zones
in the older age groups next slide
please
this is the rate of new covered hospital
patients in england by nhs region
you can see that the north is running
ahead of the rest of the country
at the moment next slide please
drilling down a little bit into the
north west
you can see cheshire greater manchester
and lancashire as
stp partnership areas and all of those
increases in the number of patients
being hospitalized with covid19 now
next slide please thank you prime
minister oh thank you
thank you very much uh jvt and
the presentation that you've just seen
uh shows clearly
why we must act and as we act
i don't want anybody to think that your
actions our actions
are in vain or the efforts in vain
because our collective action across the
country has brought the
r number well below its natural rate
of about three as a result the virus is
not spreading
as quickly as it did in february and
march
however while the r is below its natural
level
it does remain above one meaning that
the virus continues
to spread so we need to take action to
reduce the
r control the virus especially in those
parts of the
of the country as you've just seen where
the virus is most
prevalent and this evening informed by
the data that we've just seen i can
announce that greater manchester will
move to the very
high alert level that means that pubs
and bars must close unless they're
serving substantial meals
households can't mix indoors or in most
outdoor settings
in some public outdoor spaces groups
must be limited to the
rule of six and we strongly advise
against travel
into and out of the area in line with
the
additional measures taken in lancashire
casinos bingo halls betting shops adult
gaming centers
and soft play areas must also close
regulations will be laid in parliament
on thursday and come into force
just after midnight i know that these
restrictions are tough both on
businesses
and individuals and believe me no one
wants to uh be
putting these things into effect but
that's why we're also enacting a
comprehensive package
of support the job support scheme
ensures those affected by business
closures are still paid those affected
by business closures are still paid
and once you top that up with universal
credit those on low incomes will receive
at least 80 percent of their normal
income
we've made available up to 465 million
pounds
to help local authorities implement and
enforce
restrictions greater manchester will
receive 22 million pounds
of this and that's on top of the extra 1
billion pounds
were providing in funding for local
authorities across
the whole country we will work with
local authorities
including greater manchester to allocate
testing and
introduce local contact tracing
over the last 10 days we tried to get an
approach with local leaders in greater
manchester
a joint approach unfortunately agreement
wasn't reached and i do regret this as i
said
last week it would have been better and
uh we would have a better chance of
defeating the virus if we work together
in addition i must say to the support
outlined above we made a generous and
extensive offer
to support manchester's business i want
to stress
this offer was proportionate to the
support we've given merseyside
and lancashire le mayo didn't
accept this unfortunately and given the
public health situation i must now
proceed with moving greater manchester
as i say to the very high
alert level because not to act
would put manchester's nhs and the lives
of many
of manchester's residents at risk
despite the failure to reach an
agreement i hope the mayor and council
leaders in greater manchester
will now work with us to implement these
measures
elsewhere discussions on moving to the
very high alert level
continue with local leaders in south
yorkshire west yorkshire
nottinghamshire and the northeast
i hope and expect central and local
government
will continue to work closely together
as we're seeing in merseyside in
in london in lancashire and in many
other parts of the
country because ultimately all of us
want
to protect the nhs and in doing so to
save lives
thank you i'm now going to go to
questions from
the public can we have our our first
question
please how many places
under tier three restrictions would be
needed before implementing a national
lockdown
well i think what we're trying to avoid
is a
uh a national lock down uh
at all and uh that that's right jacob
that's jake from uh from chester on the
on the
on the video we don't rule anything out
jake
uh but the the difficulty is that
the the distribution of the virus this
time round is very
uneven by comparison with uh with march
and
april and so the right response as many
other countries are doing
is to go for this local and unregional
approach that's what we're that's what
we're going for let's go next to vicky
from
from lancashire
vicky from lancaster asks my mother my
grandmother has dementia
lives in a care home and has been in and
out of hospital over recent months
due to restrictions on visiting local
lockdowns i've only been allowed to
visit her
once since march is there an opportunity
for the restrictions on visiting care
homes to be reviewed
which may enable an individual to visit
their loved ones well i'm going to i'm
going to
ask jvt jonathan van tan to comment on
that in a
in a second but i just want to say vicky
that you know
everybody sympathizes deeply uh with
uh with you and and your family and this
is a
situation that tragically is being
replicated up and down
the country we do have to prevent
the spread of the virus in care homes
you remember what happened in
uh in the early part of the of the year
so we have had to take some steps
to protect elderly residents from the
possibility of infection
by visitors but we are certainly looking
at what we can do
to review the circumstances
that might allow people to visit their
elderly
relatives in in extreme circumstances
and on compassionate grounds because you
know this it is a
i can see how how absolutely wretched it
is and
i think many many people across the
country who have now had
experience of this of this problem uh
jbt do you want to adeline
thank you prime minister i mean this is
really extremely distressing
and i know it's extremely distressing
for relatives
and for people who live in care homes
but the unfortunate and horrible truth
about this virus
is that when it gets into care homes it
can inflict
really massive mortality very quickly
and the staff that go into care homes
are being regularly tested
we can't get them to live in the care
home as well
so they are in contact with the
community and there is this
constant tension between wanting to see
relatives
and not wanting to witness catastrophic
mortality
in these care homes i am hoping
that some of the pilots with rapid and
novel
testing methods will eventually lead to
a breakthrough
so that we can be more relaxed about
visiting residents and and our families
in
care homes in a much safer way
but for now it is i acknowledge openly
a very difficult situation indeed and uh
and thanks for mentioning that point jbt
about the
the new types of um of testing systems
that we
were hoping to to bring in and as i said
in
in the press conference on friday we
will be
prioritizing uh care homes uh for those
tests because it is a a truly uh
tragic and very very difficult situation
for for many people
uh let's go to vicky young of the bbc
please vicky
prime minister in the last few hours
thousands and thousands of businessmen
from greater manchester have been told
that they are going to have to close
very soon you've talked about 22 million
pounds
of help for the greater manchester area
can you now clear up because many of
your own mps in the area do not know
what are you offering to the area beyond
that
are you withdrawing the extra what you
called
generous offer is that now off the table
and what do you say to the mayor of
greater manchester
who has accused you of grinding down
communities
through these negotiations and then to
professor van tam if i could uh northern
ireland and wales have both now
announced what they're calling a
fire break a short period of severe
restrictions do you think that now
should be the approach for england as
well
uh well thank you thank you very much uh
vicky
look i i bitterly uh regret
any uh restrictions that lead to damage
to
uh businesses and to people's lives of
course i do and nobody wants to
uh be uh putting people in greater
manchester
or or anywhere through these uh through
the the experience that they've they've
been through and
and and frankly andy uh burnham is is
right in what he says about the the
length
of of the uh endurance that uh
greater manchester has has shown and and
uh
i've i've simply got to to look at the
the the data
the uh the alas the number of deaths the
hospital
admissions and and we have to act and of
course the
the package that uh i described the 22
million uh
of uh uh that i i described that's
additional to other support um you know
we're always happy to
uh continue to uh consider that but then
don't forget
vicky that this is a government that has
uh
put uh 190 billion pounds uh
already in uh supporting businesses and
jobs
uh livelihoods across the across the
country
uh we are uh investing uh
huge sums to uh support local
authorities and another
a billion pounds as i said and greater
manchester will have access to
uh all kinds of funds particularly to
help with
uh testing uh and and tracing
uh and uh and and of course uh
with enforcement so um
the funds are there uh they're they're
massive
uh and um what we couldn't do
i hope people understand was do a deal
with greater manchester that really
would have been
uh out of kilter with the uh
the agreements we'd already reached with
with merseyside and
and with lancashire and that was the
that was the the problem
um but uh you know it's
i'm very very grateful to uh to andy and
to uh his teams for uh going ahead now
as they
have said they will and implementing uh
these measures
and uh the most important thing now
is that people comply and that we get
a higher level of compliance in greater
manchester
and in all the areas that are
currently in the upper tiers because
that's the way to drive the r down vicki
so i'll continue and answer my question
thank you for it
um and the answer's kind of in four
parts um
first of all i hope my uh opening slides
were very clear
that pretty much everywhere in england
is now heating up to some extent
and we are trying to walk a very fine
line
between getting the virus under control
in areas where it is out of control
and um incurring the minimum amount of
economic damage
in doing so and it is clear that in the
areas where it is out of control and i
focused on those
in the presentation hard measures
are needed but do i think right now
it is appropriate to insist on those
similar hard measures
in for example the southwest of england
or
kent where levels of disease are really
very very much lower than in the north
of england
in other words the national fire break
you talk about
no i don't think that's right and i
don't think that's consistent
with the epidemiological picture we're
seeing or indeed consistent
with the pressures that are being
seen in different parts of the health
service
across the country which again are very
different and maybe professor powers
might comment on that point yes thank
you jvt so so as jvt has shown with the
epidemiology there is
variation among around the country and
indeed that is also reflected
in the number of patients that we see in
hospitals so
if i give you an example of that there
are more patients in hospitals in
greater manchester alone at the moment
than there are in hospitals in the
entire southeast
and southwest of the country so we are
seeing
uh variability in infection rates those
infection rates
inevitably lead to unfortunately more
deaths they lead to more hospital
admissions and more people in hospitals
they actually lead to more long-term
symptoms because we now
also know uh that covid can affect you
beyond the initial acute illness in
what's becoming known as long covered
and that's a a condition that affects
all ages so it's not just
the elderly but it is variable
throughout the country so
the key to this as the prime minister
and jonathan has said
is to reduce infection rates uh and that
requires measures to be put in place
that will do that but also crucially
for people to comply with those measures
the british public did that in april and
may and we saw what happened
r came below one and death rates and
hospital rates began to fall
so we know these measures work and and
really we can all play a part here it's
for
everybody in in the public to comply
with the measures
to reduce the spread of the virus and
that will
then reduce hospital admissions it will
benefit
obviously people with kovid but it will
also benefit other patients who don't
have covid
because the last thing we want to do is
to eat into the capacity that we have in
hospitals
that we use to treat other conditions
thank you very much
stephen thank you thank you vicky let's
go to carl dillon of itv
thank you prime minister uh will
businesses
in manchester like the pub where i'm
sitting now have to close
without any of the extra support that
you were talking to andy burnham about
earlier today and is manchester being
made an example of
and if i could ask jonathan van tan as
well two quick questions
are these tier three measures with the
added restrictions that come with them
enough to make a difference in greater
manchester and how damaging has the ten
days or so of delay
been well listened to carl thank you
very much and
um clearly uh
we wanted uh a deal that as i said that
was the
the best way uh forward we've had to
take action just because of the urgency
of the
of the situation uh i've described the
uh some of the funds that are
already on the table other discussions
undoubtedly will
uh continue but just just so you so just
for your
uh for your for your viewers uh karl for
our viewers
um we've already for in in greater
manchester provide 196 million
pounds of additional coveted funding to
local authorities in greater manchester
uh 663 million pounds to the greater
manchester local enterprise
uh partnership through the local uh
growth fund uh
to help them uh and uh 81 million pounds
of shovel ready projects
to support uh business uh and growth in
in manchester uh we don't want to
uh do this uh in a way that uh we've had
to
obviously we're gonna keep uh talking to
andy burnham and
and his teams but you know i'm grateful
to
them i'm grateful to uh to the
leadership of the councils in
in manchester now for getting behind the
measures
that were putting in place because
that's our best chance of
getting the virus done
so um to your question carl about
tier three measures the nationally
published
tier three measures are the minimum
national standard for hard measures
but there are other things that local
authorities
can consider on top and i hope some do
what is really important is compliance
you know everybody needs to
accept that this is not a good place to
be if you're in tier three
but to get behind it and try and get the
rate of disease
falling so that are in that area is
falling
so that the pressure comes off the
health service
particularly in those 60 plus age groups
and to your point about
what's 10 days delay look like well i've
got some data in front of me
and i'll just pick out um three
local areas and i'll first of all give
you
the case rate per 100
000 in the age 60 plus
between the 1st and the 7th of october
and then i'll fast forward to the 8th to
the 14th of october so that's not quite
your 10 days
but i hope it'll give you some idea so
manchester um initial figure
302 per hundred thousand
later figure 326 salford 164
later figure 287
wigan 207
later figure 399.
so i hope that gives you some kind of
understanding
of what we talk about when we talk about
you know the doubling time
and when we talk about the rapid rate of
progress of health service
amenable problems in the elderly
once this disease gets out of control in
an area
and i hope that gives you some flavor of
what that kind of time period produces
at the moment
thanks very much jbt stephen
i think it's worth um saying that as jvt
has said in terms of doubling rates of
infection that also
plays directly into the effects on
hospital admissions and hospital and
patients in hospital so
so we have made this point many times
and you alluded to it
that any measures that are introduced
now people comply with them
it will be up to two weeks before we see
that having an effect
on the nhs because there is an
incubation period for the virus of about
five days
then there's five to seven days of
symptoms before typically people present
and
have to be admitted to hospital for the
for the for the
small proportion that do so to give you
an example in greater manchester which
which um illustrates that so my
colleagues in the nhs and greater
manchester are doing a great job at the
moment
they are managing they are working
together as a healthcare system to
ensure they can
manage the rising number of patients
with covid but also
keep services going for everybody who
hasn't got covered and it's really
important that people continue to access
those services
but two weeks ago there were just over
330 patients in hospitals in greater
manchester
two weeks further on i.e uh
yesterday there were just over 620 so
that's a doubling
uh another two weeks if that doubles
again uh then we're
into 1200 or so now at the very peak in
manchester in greater manchester
uh on the 18th of april there were 1277
patients in their hospitals so in two
weeks time
we could well be seeing at the current
rate of rise
the sorts of numbers of patients in
hospitals in greater manchester that we
saw at the peak in april
and that's why it's really important
that measures are taken
at the right time and it's really
important why everybody complies with
them
to get infection rates down thanks steve
and
thanks carl let's go to tom newton down
at times radio
good afternoon prime minister thank you
very much wales and
northern ireland both have lower
infection rates
than england sometimes considerably
lower yet both have voluntarily put
themselves into
regional lockdowns pretty much
everything closed apart from schools
why have you decided to take a different
course why are you
not looking at regional or local
lockdowns
at the moment and the question to john
the van time and stephen powers please
john vantam you just eloquently
explained why
national lockdowns national circuit
breakers
uh may not be such a clever idea with
varying infection rates but
can you confirm you are actively looking
at local
circuit breakers for these hot spot
areas and how long
are you going to give tier 3 to work to
reduce the rate
in manchester liverpool etc before you
then advise the prime minister to move
on to
local circuit breakers well tom thank
you
thank you very much uh first of all
obviously uh in the areas which
uh are experiencing a particular surge
of the virus
uh the the now in tier three or going
into tier three
you know we rule nothing out if we have
to take
uh tougher measures and of course uh we
will
uh we think that that local regional
approach
is is right but i just want to go back
to the points of both steve and jbt have
been
making that the way to make this work
with with tier 3
is for everybody to comply and
i think the the package of measures that
we have
uh in tier three in these hot spot areas
if they
are implemented if they are implemented
uh will do the trick in those areas and
that can make a huge difference
to the overall spread of the virus in
the in the country
so um thank you for the question
my retort is rather simple really that
um
you know we just can't afford
just to let our elderly die
and we can't afford to allow our nhs
to be completely consumed by looking
after covid
so it can't do its other business as
usual work
so we'll have to take as tough measures
are necessary
to stop that and the typical
lead time the lag time between doing
something
and beginning to see a discernible
effect in terms of
first case rates and then maybe delayed
by another week
hospital admissions is two to three
weeks
and just to make a point that again that
the prime minister made
you know we're running now with the
brakes partially on
and the r is 1.3 to 1.5
according to the latest spy m estimates
so you know we can't take the break off
on this
and we may have to push on the pedal a
little harder to get it back under
control
thanks very much steven thank you tom uh
jason groves
of the daily mail
thanks so um first of all can you clear
up once and for whether manchester is
going to get this 60 million pounds that
you offered uh earlier in the day
and more broadly you seem to be facing a
kind of northern revolt this isn't just
andy burnham your own ally
graham brady says there's no evidence
these measures will work and lots of
evidence they'll wreck jobs
uh the leader of middlesbrough council
says using bad
data the leader of hartley paul council
says the government can sort off if it
wants to uh
impose more restrictions why can't you
convince
northern leaders of all stripes that
you're doing the right thing
and does it matter if you can't can you
can the country go forward together if
you can't
and professor van tan can ask you very
quickly today's death toll uh
is shockingly high 241 people
is that a blip or you talked about
things being baked in is that what we're
going to
uh be saying regularly over the next few
weeks
uh well jason first of all um
let me just say in in respect of a
funding of a greater
manchester uh obviously uh we want to
uh to do more we want to as we said
earlier on today but for the sake of
fairness
uh it has to be the deal has to be in
line
with the agreements we've we've reached
with uh with lancashire and
and merseyside for instance where uh
where we have made
uh progress and i'll just just remind
you uh that
in terms of business support uh 46
700 business premises in greater
manchester have received
local authority grant payments of 546
million pounds
96 100 people
in greater manchester have received
support under the self-employed
income uh support scheme and the
chronovirus the furlough scheme
uh has looked after uh four hundred and
seven thousand nine hundred jobs
uh so far in in manchester i think
that's i i think it's just worth
repeating because all that's already uh
gone in
but we're now offering more but as i say
we had to act uh today uh because of the
uh the surgeon in cases that you you
know you've just rightly alluded to
in order to protect health and and save
lives
yeah so thank you jason yes 241
new deaths today that's up 161
compared with yesterday but on a monday
or
tuesday we always get something of a
catch-up
due to a delay in reporting deaths over
the weekend
so part of that surge in deaths
is related to the weekly pattern of
slightly lower figures at the weekend
and then a kind of catch up early in the
week but
overall is the trend upwards yes do i
expect
the trend in deaths to continue upwards
yes unfortunately i do
thanks very much jbt let's go to dominic
gateman of metro
hello prime minister um you said what we
couldn't do is a deal with great
manchester that's out of kilter
with deals struck with uh merseyside
and lancashire um uh
but uh given that the 22 million pounds
on offers
is exactly half that offered to
liverpool
should local authorities be penalized if
they do not agree
uh with the settlements offered and one
to professor van tan if i may
um is the argument for a short national
circuit break
now stronger or weaker than when sage
recommended it
on september 21st uh
well listen uh thank you very much
dominic first of all uh the the 22
million that you that you mentioned
that's that's separate and an additional
to any other
uh support that we were trying to uh
agree with
uh with with manchester for for business
uh support uh i've mentioned the figures
that we've already that the support
that's already gone in uh to support uh
business in
uh in manchester where our our door is
open to
uh to to continue that particular
conversation
but for the sake of fairness we have to
keep it in line as i said with
uh what we agreed with um uh
with with lancashire uh merseyside and
so forth
yeah could you remind me of the question
please
yes uh there's the argument for a short
national
circuit break lockdown now stronger or
weaker
than when stage recommended it on
september 21st
thank you so i've already articulated
the reasons why i think a national
lockdown
at the moment would be inappropriate
for communities in cornwall and east
anglia
for example but it is a kind of
scientific feature
of the effect of a lockdown
that if disease levels are higher
when you affect the lockdown the effect
will be
less overall than if the lockdown
is inflicted at a point when disease
levels are much
lower so i suppose what i'm saying is
is that i wouldn't expect the same
magnitude of effect
if one were done now as if it were done
early in september or mid-september but
i repeat the point that the epidemiology
is
so varied across england that i think it
would be very difficult
to justify for some communities um
thank you thank you very much uh jbt the
last question
is to jen williams of the manchester
evening news
thank you prime minister greater
manchester has been under constantly
changing lockdown measures since the
start of august
sometimes announced with just a few
hours notice sometimes emerging late at
night on social media
at one point bolton was under four
different sets of restrictions in space
of a few days
have you visited the region at any point
to speak to people about what this has
been like for them do you think you are
an apology and do you think there's any
connection between that approach and our
current high infection rate
and secondly you still haven't said
exactly how much business support
greater manchester is guessing
given that you're saying that it needs
to be in line with liverpool and
lancashire does that mean it will be no
more than 60 million pounds
and the deputy chief medical officer do
you think that a more localized approach
to contact facing before now would have
helped to keep some of these current
infections
down well uh jen let me just say
um you know to all those businesses uh
you you asked for me to apologize and i
am deeply sorry that it is necessary to
put these
uh these measures in place and to
everybody who's endured
uh the privations and the difficulties
of uh
of this period of course i'm i'm deeply
deeply sorry for
for what's been necessary uh jen uh
but you know nobody wants to enact
measures like this i i do think that
uh there has been uh some uh
simplification thanks to the tiering uh
system and that's
that's a good thing uh and uh of course
we we want to
give manchester give businesses people
in greater manchester the proper
uh levels of support as i've said uh our
door remains open
uh to uh to to andy to to discuss that
um uh though we've got it we've got to
keep it in line obviously with
with with deals already done and i just
want to repeat my my gratitude
to the people of greater manchester for
their willingness to help everybody in
the country
uh to follow the guidance follow the
rules and
get this virus done i mean that it's in
all of our hands
so on the question about um contact
tracing
i believe a blended approach of national
contact racing to kind of deal with the
high volume
low low complexity contact racing is a
good thing
but i think the local backup to deal
with complex and difficult
and hard to reach cases
is a really good idea i think you need
both to be truthful
dead right so i know how difficult it is
at the moment
uh in the in the north west and and of
course from the nhs i'm particularly
grateful to all the nhs staff in the
north west who i know are dealing day by
day with increasing number of patients
with covid and at the same time are
ensuring that all other patients cancer
patients patients with heart attacks
with strokes
a whole range of of things are also
being looked after and managed
appropriately but
but as i've said the key to keeping
doing that
is to get infection rates under control
i expect that liverpool university
hospitals will
have as many patients who are more
patients by tomorrow
with covid in in their hospitals than
they had at the peak in april
and i think that shows just how fast we
can
see infection rates and hospital
admissions
rise if we don't get this under control
so it's really critical
and as the prime minister has said we're
all grateful for everybody
to comply with these measures to
maintain social distancing and to ensure
quite simply that the virus doesn't have
a chance to spread
thank you very much steve thank you
thank you jbt and and thank you
everybody
uh for watching i look i want to repeat
the the central point that we're
we're walking a narrow path uh here
today because
we we don't want to go back into a a
national lockdown with all the
the the damage social and economic that
that can do
unless we absolutely have to uh we think
that the local
uh approach is the the reasonable one
given the the way the virus is
is dispersed and uh that's what
uh we're going to to do and just to sort
of give everybody
uh some uh some hope if you if you look
at what is actually happening with the
universities for instance they have done
a great job
i think in getting their virus uh under
control
you saw how some of those lines are
starting
to come down and i repeat the point uh
that
that we made earlier both jbt and i that
this the r
is currently above one but it's not that
much above one
and so if we all follow the uh guidance
together
and everybody uh gets together and
complies with the
uh the tiers that we the the rules for
the tiers that uh uh
that have been set out and that are on
the on the website then i've no doubt
that we can
uh drive it down particularly in those
badly affected areas
thanks very much everybody
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news